# mkmelinux - a simple Linux builder.

mkmelinux (pronounced *make me linux*) is a simple Linux builder that can build multiple types of Distros. Useful for anyone wanting to make a quick distro without going through the pains of figuring out everything, or perhaps if you want to learn something.

mkmelinux is designed to be customizable so you can make and achieve the distro you want. This is not professional software; I just made this to learn more about Linux.

---
## The "philosophy"

**mkmelinux is designed to work with the current directory.** It does not require special paths (excluding using root mount folders for VM HDDs).

**mkmelinux runs at the lowest privileges possible.** Building is typically rootful, but we can have some workarounds. You should be able to run this on any CI and it should work, without payments and KVM. In order to have VM HDD builds be reliable and work, however, KVM and kernel module vhost_vsock is required.

**mkmelinux should return the same results every time.** It's why it runs on Podman and runs VMs to build VM HDDs - it adds reliability.

**mkmelinux should be simple.** It isn't Buildroot in terms of customizability, but it sure does work.

---
## A note on execution

**I don't recommend running this on your host OS.** Building Linux is inherently messy and requires lots of dependencies, all of which I can configure and guarantee to work in a container. I also want this script to have as few dependencies as possible, and to not interfere with your host OS.

You can run this script on your host OS, however nothing is tested or guaranteed to work. So the "official way" to run mkmelinux is with the runinpodman.sh script or the distrobuilder.py script.

---
## Getting Started
Clone this repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/somerandomnobody/mkmelinux
```
Run the setup script (automatically launches TUI):
```bash
bash host-setup.sh
```
This will check if you have all dependencies installed which are necessary to run mkmelinux (Podman and Python).

Exit the TUI by pressing `q` or clicking the Quit button if you do not want to use it.

---
## Using the TUI
The TUI is designed to be simple to use so anyone can build their own Linux distro. Run the TUI by typing in a terminal `bash host-setup.sh`.

Using the TUI is quite simple - simply select what kind of Distro you want to build. The three types are outlined below:

- ISO: Produces a Linux ISO. Calamares installer is optional. This will essentially produce a file called "linux.iso" in the Output directory. Both BIOS and UEFI can boot this. I'd recommend this option even for virtual machines as it's simply easier to work with.
- Virtual Machine: Produces a Virtual machine compatible image, similar to Debian "cloud images". The format by default is RAW (.img) however you can select a qcow build option to save some disk space. All images produced with this are **UEFI only**. You will have to use UEFI to boot and use this image.
- v86: Builds a 32 bit 9p filesystem compatible with v86. Useful for making browser Linux builds. Note that there is no 64 bit option as v86 is limited to 32 bit only. These builds can be a bit buggy, but I'm including them anyway.

After choosing a distro type you want, you can click Next. Then you choose desktops and additional packages to install. 

There are a numerous amount of customization options, however I have not tested them all. Some may work and some may not; as of now, I have only tested XFCE to work correctly.

Then you will reach the final screen, where you can choose to save configuration or build. You can save your configuration and share it with someone else and they can build the exact same Linux distro that you built. **The Distro folder will contain ALL distro customizations that you configure.** This folder will be automatically generated by the distro builder script if you use it, however users not wanting to use it can follow this file structure to achieve the same result:  

```bash
├── arguments.txt
├── extrachrootsteps.sh
└── extracustomization
    ├── (any extra folders or files)
    └── wallpapers
        └── mkmelinux.png
```

`arguments.txt` is a file that specifies what arguments will be executed when mkmelinux is ran in Podman. Not running it in Podman means you have to supply the arguments yourself.

Arguments are defined in the `key=value` format, eg. `GENERATE_HOSTNAME=my-linux-distro`.

The necessary arguments are GENERATE_HOSTNAME (sets the hostname of the rootfs, this is a string (no character limit) with no special characters), CONFIGDIR (specifies the configuration directory, set it to `distro` if you are using the distro directory.), TYPE (the type of system you want to create, possible options are "HARDDISK" (virtual hard disk), "ISO" (ISO image), "V86" (v86 compatible filesystem that is bootable)), OSTYPE ("MINBASE" or "NORMAL" - essentially what *variant* of root file system you want to download. Minbase is smaller but requires more setup, so NORMAL is recommended).

If using argument "HARDDISK", you have to set "VHD_SIZE" which is an integer. It generates a raw IMG file that you can convert later on to a QCOW2 one (auto conversion coming soon).

`extrachrootsteps.sh` is a file that specifies what commands will be executed during the build process of your distro. THIS is where the customization will happen - add commands to change wallpapers, install packages, change the system, etc.

`extracustomization/` is a folder that will be directly copied over to the rootfs before your `extrachrootsteps.sh` script runs. This folder will "patch" the rootfs as it will overwrite anything that you place in it. For example, if you want to write a file to the root user's desktop, you can create the folders inside the `extracustomization` folder: "root/Desktop/Shortcut-to-app.desktop" and put file contents inside it. It is recommended that with your chroot steps script you change the permissions of the files since permissions are not changed when copying over.